Hi friends. The set changed again because we are moving from one room to another.
Everyone is making some adjustments to improve the quality of videos, to make them less yellow, whiter, bluer... It's too complicated for me!
Anyway, this is a new room, so don't be surprised...
Although I have the feeling that you were surprised but in a good way
because all those who watch this channel gave a hand,
first by giving the thumbs up so much that BANG, views increased,
but above all, you'll soon be 60,000 subscribers to this channel.
This is not a small event, it is a political fact in itself.
Subscribing to a channel gives it some impact as an autonomous and independent media.
The more people subscribe, the less I need the official media,
you know, newspapers that distort what I say or invent it,
or who use terrible photos of me... Now I don't care about all of this!
I say what I want to say to my camera, watch if you want to, don't if you don't want to,
at least you know what I have to say by myself, and... it makes me happy.
Maybe you don't see it, but it does. Besides we can thumb our nose at a lot of people.
And I have the feeling that it sheds some light on the rest of the channel's videos, this is important to me.
I don't give speeches or speak in conferences for fun you know.
I think upon issues, upon arguments,
I try to link them up in a way that helps the audience to convince other people.
OK, so, I don't remember whether this is the weekly review #7 or #8, but...
What grabbed my attention this week was, apart from my own meeting in Chambéry... Because...
we rented a room according to our means, so 400 seats,
but 1,400 people came so people had to huddle up.
The poor fellows huddled up in the hall, in the lobby, and they listened to me for two hours.
Since they had decided to stay I said hi.
But there were also people outside, and the weather in Chambéry is really cold at night...
At some point some people disconnected our live stream
and some of those outside missed a part of it, but upon the whole, 10,000 people were watching live.
We're really living in a magic era.
We had a hall of 400 seats, although we were 1,400, but that's something we know.
What was fantastic was that 10,000 more people were watching too from start to finish.
This is heartening, it cheers me up a lot, and I'm encouraged to go on gleaning little by little.
But how and what do I glean?
Well people who come are not members of my fan club, that's not what I'm doing you know... I don't smile a lot or anything.
So people come, they listen, they agree or not, they try to learn about certain issues,
but when they do agree, they agree for good.
It means they become interested, they look for information, they compare,
and then they act, within their mind at least, in favor of the ideas that we are developing.
This is important because the ideas we are developing in this campaign are not simple.
My campaign does not consist in a few slogans and a bit of communication.
It consists in a coherent set of propositions, but that's not the issue here.
I just wanted to tell you that this was my personal event, besides I caught a sinus infection on the train.
Thank you air conditioning!  I'm fed up with the air conditioning, it's on the plane, on the train, all the time,
and then you have to turn it off when you get to your hotel
if you don't want to sneeze or have clogged ears in the morning.
Enough with air conditioning, and I'm not the only one to think the same thing! It is useless.
It's perfectly normal that the weather's cold in the winter and hot in the summer.
The human body can deal with these changes,
but it is not adapted to get spurts of air into the beak all day long,
whether you are at your hotel, on the train or in the car.
So we went to Chambéry. Before the meeting, I visited a dam. I love dams you know, I love machines in general.
I already visited the Rance dam in Saint-Malo, another on in the Pyrenees, and now the one in Chambéry.
This one is really spectacular. It has three reservoirs, the water goes into pipes and downstream there's a water plant.
The dams reach a height of 1,200 meters above the plant, so let me tell you that the water runs fast!
It runs at a speed of 300 mph, with a pressure of 120 bars, then the water rotates the blades which produce electricity.
OK, so there's something surprising about this plant. The guys who built it around 1960/61
were living in a period when people loved machinery.
There's a huge underground room that is around 20 meters long and 10 meters high with marble on the floor.
There's a lighting system - it looks like daylight although it's underground -
marble on the floor and a huge mural on the wall of the back of he room.
So why did I visit the dam? First, I love watching machines and meeting people who work with them.
To me, an intellectual who studied the Humanities and philosophy, machines embody human intelligence.
So I went there because someone has to take care of this issue.
The European Commission gave notice to France - because it did not implement the decision quick enough -
that it should privatize dams? Do you people understand what that means?
A dam is made of tons, millions of tons of concrete, and this one is really wonderful.
Why would someone invest in a dam? Not to pour concrete, it's already there!
Not to supply it with water, that's not his problem. He does that to make money.
You might think "OK, that's normal", but it's not.
Who's going to repair and maintain the dam?
Who's going to make the necessary investments?
Look, let me scare you a bit. 25% of this country's dams are more than 70 years old, does that ring the bell?
It's complicated you see?
Dams must in no way be privatized, it's dangerous. I prefer warning you.
Another aspect is that a dam is a reservoir, and the water can be used for many reasons.
For agriculture, it's free; to make snow, it's not clever, but ski resorts need it,
since it doesn't snow anymore because of climate change,
and so on. Waters can be used for many reasons, like tourism, fishing, etc.
All this is free, but if the dam is privatized, it's all over pals!
Not only because the owner of the dam wants people to pay...
Let me give you an example. Someone told me about a plant, I don't remember which one.
There's a small dam nearby, and in winter - I don't know if you're aware of that -
but in the course of the last thirty years, the snow layer has decreased by 30%.
In the past, the snow layer was 1.5 meter high, now it's 1.2 meters, so they have to add some snow.
How do they do that? They take water from the nearby dam and make snow out of it.
Meanwhile, the dam is dry and can no longer produce electricity.
For now they do it for free, but if someone owns it, we'll have to pay.
Let me give you another example to scare you a bit. Maybe you don't know about this,
but the electricity production must be level between producers and consumers.
It means that an electric system is a whole. If you stop it somewhere there will be problems.
For instance in Germany, a boat once knocked over a transmission tower and caused a blackout all over the country.
Fortunately France was able to supply Germany with electricity to rebalance the electric system,
since we had enough electricity in store.
We turned it on and BANG, it worked again.
So the electric production must always be level.
Sometimes we overproduce electricity because people don't use it,
so the production has to be slowed down.
But where and how should it be slowed down?
For instance it takes some time to stop a thermic plant.
If the electricity comes from a nuclear power plant,
you can't stop it just by raising the bars that prevent the atomic reaction, it takes time.
The only thing that can adapt to this situation in less than 20 and sometimes 5 minutes are dams.
Therefore, the hydroelectric system regulates the whole country's electric system.
Now imagine that the dam is privatized and you are the guy who must take the decision to regulate the system,
you see that there's too much electricity, so you have to cut it, but where?
You decide that such and such dam has to stop its production.
Until now, stopping the production of a dam didn't cost a penny,
but with a private dam, the owner will tell you he has nothing to do with your problem,
he'll ask you to pay for the electricity he cannot sell, and unballasting electricity will cost us some money.
What is the consequence of that? First, the guy who takes the decision will wait until the very last minute.
You know, "We have to economize, be competitive, flexible and efficient" and all these tall tales.
So the guy or the girl who has to take the decision of unballasting electricity will wait and wait.
Now you understand the consequence of privatizing dams.
If someone is compelled to make profit with a system that is on the verge of collapse, then the risks are higher.
In other words, privatizing dams doesn't solve problems, it creates problems, and that's what the European Commission wants to do.
I visited the dam in order to alert the public opinion, and let me tell you that
if you elect me as president, dams will not be privatized.
You might think "OK, but what if the Commission refuses?", well if they refuse I'll do it anyway.
Norway already did that. It is not a member of the EU, but it is a member of the European Economic Area.
Norway decided that the production of electricity was a matter of national (or strategic or defense, you name it) interest,
and that it should therefore remain a public property, period. Even the EU treaties authorize public property for matters of national interest.
Neither Mr Hollande and the Socialist Party nor Mr Sarkozy did that,
and we can see the result: we are given notice by highbrows sitting in an office in Brussels
who claim to decide what we the French should do with our dams and our electric system.
So this is why I went to Chambéry.
I'd like to discuss another issue with you my friends, otherwise no one will, it is poverty.
For those who follow me on YouTube, I discussed this in my speech at the Fête de l'Humanité,
in my speech at the Toulouse picnic, in Chambéry as well, and I try to talk about it everywhere I go.
Why? Because poverty is a subject people don't like to talk about. I understand this, it's human.
You think "Ah, so much poverty!". The poor are 9 million in this country,
I constantly remind people that someone is considered to be poor when he earns less than 1,000 euros a month.
And when I say this in a meeting, some people in the hall roll their eyes
because to them, 1,000 euros is a lot of money.
I think the minimum old-age pension is around 460 or 465 euros, I don't exactly remember the figure.
This shows that 1,000 euros is a lot, so the poor in this country are more numerous than we think,
or more accurately, being poor is not the same when you earn 900, 400 or 200 euros a month.
So we have to deal with this subject, poverty strikes everyone, I constantly repeat it.
The have-not have even less while the rich get even richer, this is a fact.
They go from poverty to extreme poverty. What is the difference between the two?
When you are poor, you can live in a tiny house and because you couldn't pay the bills, there's no electricity
and water trickles from the tap but at least you have a home!
When you live in extreme poverty, you sleep on the street, or in a car,
you hide somewhere. A lot of people are hiding, a lot!
Everyone knows I live in Paris, and I see people hiding at night.
Some people sleep in the entrance of supermarkets. There are women with a kid, or two, who hide at night.
They hide because they think that if they ask for help, their children will be taken away from them,
and their kids are all these poor people have left.
This is the real life in our country, and this is intolerable!
OK. You know my political preferences, I am rather in favor of the Secours Populaire, downright even.
They are doing admirable work, give them a hand!
But there's a recent study that was made by the Secours Catholique. It's not really my political preference,
but they did a really good job.
Not so many people help the poor, so when an association does, you have to help it,
you have to support it even if your political ideas are different.
So the Secours Catholique did a good job, they conducted a survey.
They ask every candidate to the presidential election whether they'll talk about this issue.
Well I will! I will speak of poverty in each of my speeches and interventions.
I know poverty is a scourge!
And the issue is not money. People call the poor the have-not, but the problem is not about not having.
The problem is that the poor don't take care of their health so they become even more ill,
and therefore they contaminate other people.
Poverty also means less education, and above all less humanity,
because when you are poor, people avoid you, and you dare not being with them.
You dare not because you don't have the means to do anything,
and since you don't have money, you hide in order to keep your dignity,
because you don't want to show that you have nothing,
that you can't have a drink with friends because you can't afford a cup of coffee.
You can't invite your friends in the evening because you have nothing to offer
and sometimes you don't even have a house. Anyway you got the picture,
poverty means suffering from start to finish, it is a sort of dehumanization.
It doesn't mean you are no longer a human being, it means that you no longer love or want to do things...
You have human desires, but society always says no, it stands like a wall in front of you.
Therefore, I want to talk about this issue,
because of the study that was published, and because the Secours Catholique asked the candidates about it.
And as far as you're concerned, give a hand to the Secours Populaire or the Secours Catholique,
or those who do fieldwork, like unions for example,
because the poor often work, keep that in mind. We have to give them a hand.
I was with some friends a few days ago, we were giving money to poor people,
and one of them said "We can't help everyone!' and I said "If you can't help everyone, just help some of them".
I'm not saying that's the way to solve the problem, I don't think it is,
but don't look for excuses for not giving money.
A few coins and a kind word sometimes help the poor to hold their head up, and you'll do your good deed, alright? Good.
Now I'll speak of the strike at I-Télé.
It started because journalists refused to work with someone
who was considered to be a problem for ethical reasons, who did not correspond to the idea they had of their work.
And of course, as is the case in every strike, one problem led to another,
and I-télé's journalists figured out that the problem was not the undesirable person
but a certain conception of journalism and team work.
Now the strike is over. It resulted in the resignation of 35 journalists. Thirty-five!
It is a disaster.
A loss of thirty-five journalists is something big for a an editorial staff.
Well. I only have one thing to say about this.
How many times have I said that the media's problem was a social one?!
You can't produce quality information and entertainment
if you don't have the human means to produce them or if you are forced to exploit employees.
In the case of information for instance - I am well aware with this issue since I deal with journalists -
how could journalists produce quality information when they have to cover three or five topics a day?
How do they manage to cover them? They don't have a choice, they have to cover THE topic.
And who tells them what THE issue is? Their boss!
The boss tells them where to find information and where to film.
This way of working impacts journalism itself,
and when you look at the top of the editorial staff's hierarchy, you discover that there is no editorial board.
There's just a big boss who gives orders to other bosses who give orders to those who do fieldwork.
There are guys who stay in their office all day long while the rest of the staff is freezing doing fieldwork.
What kind of information can this type of labor division produce other than the information you get nowadays?
So they went on strike.
Those who resigned did so using the clause conscience.
It enables them to get a redundancy payment, not much, but many professions do not offer this opportunity.
Then I read something in an article. A journalist wrote:
"In the end, TV administrators get what they want through the use of force." No, no, no! That's not true.
Administrators get what they want through the use of force everywhere! and not just in the TV sector.
It is time that TV and newspaper journalists understand that they are employees, just like normal people.
Now when they'll cover strikes or social struggles again, they'd better remember what they just went through,
and how humiliating it is when your boss doesn't care, no matter how hard you try.
There's another conclusion we can draw from this strike.
This is what happens when 9 billionaires own 90% of the media in this country.
Nine billionaires, 90%!
So stop talking about ethical independent media and whatnot, because that's not true.
I know that most journalists try to do their job as well and honestly as they can, but that's not the issue here.
Just stop hiding behind your status!
Don't take it as a personal offense when some people criticize the media system.
Please understand that we would just like to have quality media and information.
To do this, we need to build a wall between the media and money.
Journalists must be able to do their job in good social conditions.
Stop treating some members of your staff like slaves!
Stop employing trainees during holidays!
Also, there must be editorial boards, citizens must have a say on the content.
I propose that citizens who pay a television license elect the director of France Télévision (public television).
"But how should we do that?"
It's easy: FT's employees could tell us that such and such person is competent for this job.
Previous to that some people would apply for the job, and then a committee could say who is capable.
I think people would vote. We do organize elections for employment tribunals and a lot of other institutions.
Why could we not vote for FT's president? Do you think we can't tell the difference between an honest person
and a yes-man who licks the boots of his boss? We can do this.
Finally, every editorial staff should have an editorial board and an ethical charter.
If what I propose had been implemented, the situation at I-télé would be different.
Do you hear me people? If what I have proposed since 2012 had been implemented,
the situation at I-télé would be different.
I'm not saying this to scold I-télé's staff.
My friends expressed their solidarity during their struggles.
I'm saying this so that journalists understand criticism and alternative propositions.
Instead of exaggerating what I say and calling me a Soviet, whether it be I-télé or another media,
instead of calling me the far left in order to scare people,
instead of treating Xavier Mathieu as he was...
Do you remember how the media treated him during the Continental workers' struggle?
Like a wild beast!
If you journalists had tried to understand the situation instead of treating Continental workers as you did,
you would have understood that there was a connection between their situation and yours.
Now let me tell you that if I am elected, the media will undergo a citizen revolution.
Do you know who in my opinion should have the power? Subscribers, not owners.
Media users who pay a TV license, not the President of the Republic,
who appoints FT's director if he is approved by the Parliament that only has the power to refuse.
This method goes back to the Middle Ages!
Why do they fear voters' decision? Are they afraid of people?
If you subscribe to a newspaper, it means that you like it, and therefore you want it to work well.
Why should you not have your say then?
Why could you not give your opinion on candidates? Such person was a chief editor, now he is retired
so you could choose someone from the staff or from another media.
That's the editorial policy, that's the reason why you subscribed! Besides, subscriptions are expensive!
And if you subscribe to a newspaper, it means you are interested in its activity.
Managers should not be afraid of people.
On the contrary, they should trust them, things would get better. At least, that's what I would do.
Oh! And let me thank the 18-25 forum on the website jeuxvideos.com [jeuxvideos = videogames, NDT] warmly.
They said nice things about me, so it's my turn to say hooray for the 18-25 forum on jeuxvideos.com!
They came up with a motto about me, I didn't get it, but my staff explained to me what it meant.
It says "Can't stenchon the Melenchon!". Got it?
So my reply will be "Yes, we canchon!".
If you liked this video, give me the blue thumbs up
and you can subscribe to my channel, because it's free, and ad-free!